content: draft: Expand 'organization requirements' (#1362)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/draft/source-requirements.md

| Source Control System (SCS) | A suite of tools and services (self-hosted or SaaS) relied upon by the organization to produce new revisions of the source. The role of the SCS may be fulfilled by a single service (e.g., GitHub / GitLab) or rely on a combination of services (e.g., GitLab with Gerrit code reviews, GitHub with OpenSSF Scorecard, etc).
| Source Provenance | Information about how a revision came to exist, where it was hosted, when it was generated, what process was used, who the contributors were, and what parent revisions it was based on.
| Repository / Repo | A uniquely identifiable instance of a VCS. The repository controls access to the Source in the VCS. The objective of a repository is to reflect the intent of the organization that controls it.
| Branch | A named, moveable, pointer to a revision that tracks development in the named context over time. Branches may be modified to point to different revisions by authorized actors. Different branches may have different security requirements.

> | Tag | A named pointer to a revision that does not typically move. Tags may be created (and sometimes modified) by authorized actors. Different tags may be used for different purposes (e.g. denote a specific version of the software, or the 'latest' release).

Reviewer: Does any VCS have this concept besides git?

Author: The tag concept?  Yes.

* Subversion: https://tortoisesvn.net/docs/release/TortoiseSVN_en/tsvn-dug-branchtag.html
* Perforce: https://help.perforce.com/helix-core/server-apps/p4guide/current/Content/P4Guide/labels.revision.html
* CVS: https://www.gnu.org/software/trans-coord/manual/cvs/html_node/Tags.html#:~:text=There%20is%20seldom%20reason%20to%20tag%20a%20file%20in%20isolation.%20A%20more%20common%20use%20is%20to%20tag%20all%20the%20files%20that%20constitute%20a%20module%20with%20the%20same%20tag%20at%20strategic%20points%20in%20the%20development%20life%2Dcycle%2C%20such%20as%20when%20a%20release%20is%20made.
* Mercurial: https://wiki.mercurial-scm.org/Tag

Reviewer: What if we just updated the branch definition to say "on git, when the spec says 'branch' we mean all refs, including refs/tags"

Author: I guess because we'd discussed how people use tags differently from branches and were hoping to apply different requirements (e.g. tag hygiene) to tags but not branches.

We also don't expect folks to have continuity for tags.

Reviewer: That's a neat list!
My question was not very clear -- in all those VCS products, the producer is responsible for guaranteeing or not what labels/tags mean vs branches. 
Functionally, I think all products allow writers to change them. This is quite different from revision ids which are not mutable, even by producers/writers. 

What if we just said:
```suggestion
| Tag | A named pointer to a revision that does not typically move. Similar to branches, tags may be modified by authorized actors. Tags are often used by producers to indicate a more permanent name for a revision.
```

Author: Oh yes I like this. :)

they MUST choose a source control system capable of producing Source Level 3
attestations.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="choose-process"><td>Choose an appropriate change management process<td>

An organization producing source revisions MUST implement a change management
process to ensure changes to source matches the organization's intent.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

> <tr id="specify-protection"><td>Specify which branches and tags are protected<td>

Reviewer: we technically don't define "tag" in the definitions section. 
Generally, we mean it to be a named source context. Just like our definition of branch, it is a named pointer to a revision. 
We could talk about it separately from the perspective of git, but maybe not strictly relevant. 
```suggestion
<tr id="specify-protection"><td>Specify which branches are protected<td>
```

Author: Hmm, so this is a preview of what I'd like to improve about how we currently specify tag requirements.

E.g. [here](https://slsa.dev/spec/draft/source-requirements#future-considerations:~:text=If%20a%20tag%20is%20used%20to%20identify%20a%20specific%20commit%20to%20external%20systems%2C%20it%20MUST%20NOT%20be%20possible%20to%20move%20or%20delete%20those%20tags.) we say "If a tag is used to identify a specific commit to external systems, it MUST NOT be possible to move or delete those tags" but it's not clear how the SCS can _know_ if a tag is used to specify a commit to an external system.

What I'm trying to do here is put that requirement on the organization.  E.g. they have to indicate which tags get this protection.  So, since we do talk about tags and how they need to meet different requirements depending on how they're used it seems relevant to include.

I can definitely add a tag definition.

WDYT?

Author: Added a definition for 'tag' and tweaked the 'branch' definition. PTAL

Author: I'll take two 👍  and one "no blocking notes" comment from @zachariahcox as an indication I can close this. :)

Reviewer 2: in future, would it help if I left an agreeing comment rather than a reaction?

The organization MUST indicated which branches and tags it protects with Source

> Level 2+ controls.  Only those indicated branches and tags will be eligible for
> Source Level 2+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Level 2+ controls.
```

I'm guessing we should drop this -- elsewhere I think we say anything with a VSA could have a SLSA level.

Author: Yeah, I wasn't trying to say they couldn't get a SLSA level at all, they just can't get Level 2+.

But what I think you're really saying is that it's redundant?

Reviewer: Yes, and also that current or previous branch reachability is not required for any VSA.
If your process requires reachability, cool, but it's not a required part of the spec.

For example, if an organization has branches 'main' and 'experimental' and it
intends for 'main' to be protected then it MUST indicate to the SCS that 'main'
should be protected. From that point forward revisions on 'main' will be
eligible for Source Level 2+ while revisions made solely on 'experimental' will
not.

> 

Reviewer: I guess we need the explicit declaration of branch intent to help consumers "know where to start".

IE, I don't know that you'd be able to find a VSA before a sha, and the sha comes from specific branch pointers typically. You'd probably read what branch you're "supposed to use" then wire up your build pipeline to consume it. 

Then, in the normal verification flows, you'd start with the sha-pointed-to-by-the-ref-or-lockfile and check for VSA, without any further strict requirement on branch setup.

Author: I think I agree, but I'm not sure. :)

Are you looking for any changes?  I think this is getting at what you've described.

Author: Yes.  I think this is now more clear with the specific tags to use (and hopefully in combination with #1365).

It is also the case that removing content from a repository won't necessarily remove it everywhere.
The content may still exist in other copies of the repository, either in backups or on developer machines.

#### Process

An organization MUST document the Safe Expunging Process and describe how requests and actions are tracked and SHOULD log the fact that content was removed.
Different organizations and tech stacks may have different approaches to the problem.

SCSs SHOULD have technical mechanisms in place which require an Administrator plus, at least, one additional 'trusted person' to trigger any expunging (removals) made under this process.

The application of the safe expunging process and the resulting logs MAY be private to both prevent calling attention to potentially sensitive data (e.g. PII) or to comply with local laws
and regulations which may require the change to be kept private to the extent possible.
Organizations SHOULD prefer to make logs public if possible.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="specify-control-expectations"><td>Specify control expectations<td>

> The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect
> revisions on a branch to have met.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The organization MUST specify what technical controls are enforced on revisions in each branch.
```

minor nit: "to have met" is hard to parse?

Author: Hmm, so what I was thinking is something like:

An org enforces controls A, B, C on a repo.  They're still not sure about C, or it's private or something.   So 1. they don't want to publicize C, and 2. they don't want users forming expectations (#1365) that C will always be there.

So while the two versions (mine and your suggestion) might seem the same, the key difference is that when I read the proposed version it requires _all_ controls to be specified, not just the ones "consumers can expect".

Maybe  "The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect to be enforced for revisions in each branch."  ?

Author: and then maybe I need to add an example about controls that don't need to be specified?

Author: Gave it a shot. PTAL?

Author: I think this does the trick (and this thread is outdated).  So closing it.

Different organizations and tech stacks may have different approaches to the problem.

SCSs SHOULD have technical mechanisms in place which require an Administrator plus, at least, one additional 'trusted person' to trigger any expunging (removals) made under this process.

The application of the safe expunging process and the resulting logs MAY be private to both prevent calling attention to potentially sensitive data (e.g. PII) or to comply with local laws
and regulations which may require the change to be kept private to the extent possible.
Organizations SHOULD prefer to make logs public if possible.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="specify-control-expectations"><td>Specify control expectations<td>

The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect to be
enforced for revisions in each branch using the
[Enforced change management process](#enforced-change-management-process).

For example, an organization may wish claim that revisions on `main` require
unit tests to have passed prior to merge.  The organization could then

> configure the SCS to enforce this requirement and embed the
> `USER_SOURCE_UNIT_TESTED` tag in the
> [source summary attestations](#summary-attestation) and have the SCS store
> corresponding [test result attestations] for all affected revisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configure the SCS to enforce this requirement and store
corresponding [test result attestations] for all affected revisions. 
They may then embed the `USER_SOURCE_UNIT_TESTED` tag in the
[source summary attestations](#summary-attestation).
```

> Consumers would be able to establish the expectation that revisions on `main`
> have been united tested and determine if that expectation has been met by
> looking for the `USER_SOURCE_UNIT_TESTED` tag in the VSA and, if desired,
> consult the [test result attestations] as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consumers would be able to determine whether the control was enforced by
looking for the `USER_SOURCE_UNIT_TESTED` tag in the VSA and, if desired,
consulting the [test result attestations] as well.
```

Author: I've clarified the language some but I think we need to keep the expectation setting part.

It's not just about how they check if a control was implemented but also about how they know if they _should_ check.

So it goes something like:

1. I have no expectations.
2. I see a VSA that says "this thing on main is unit tested"
3. I now expect that future things on main are unit tested
4. I look for the corresponding claim for future revisions.

they MUST choose a source control system capable of producing Source Level 3
attestations.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="choose-process"><td>Choose an appropriate change management process<td>

An organization producing source revisions MUST implement a change management
process to ensure changes to source matches the organization's intent.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="specify-protection"><td>Specify which branches and tags are protected<td>

> The organization MUST indicated which branches and tags it protects with Source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The organization MUST indicate which branches and tags it protects with Source
```

The content may still exist in other copies of the repository, either in backups or on developer machines.

#### Process

An organization MUST document the Safe Expunging Process and describe how requests and actions are tracked and SHOULD log the fact that content was removed.
Different organizations and tech stacks may have different approaches to the problem.

SCSs SHOULD have technical mechanisms in place which require an Administrator plus, at least, one additional 'trusted person' to trigger any expunging (removals) made under this process.

The application of the safe expunging process and the resulting logs MAY be private to both prevent calling attention to potentially sensitive data (e.g. PII) or to comply with local laws
and regulations which may require the change to be kept private to the extent possible.
Organizations SHOULD prefer to make logs public if possible.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="specify-control-expectations"><td>Specify control expectations<td>

The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect to be
enforced for revisions in each branch.

> For example, an organization may wish consumers to form an expectation that
> revisions on 'main' require unit tests to have passed prior to merge.  The
> organization would then configure the SCS to enforce this requirement and
> embed the relevant metadata in the [source summary](#summary-attestation) and/or
> [source provenance](#provenance-attestations) attestations for all affected
> revisions.  Consumers of those revisions would be able to determine if these
> expectations have been met via those attestations.

Reviewer: minor. The "to form an expectation" verbiage is a little wonky. 
I think the producer is making a promise, and that promise should be verified by consumers. 

```suggestion
For example, an organization may claim that revisions on 'main' require unit 
tests to have passed prior to merge.  The organization would then configure 
the SCS to enforce this requirement and record evidence of the enforcement in 
the [source summary](#summary-attestation) and/or
[source provenance](#provenance-attestations) attestation for all affected
revisions.  Consumers of those revisions can verify that the promises were 
met via the evidence in those attestations.
```

Author: You're right.  I reworked this a lot with the other changes, hopefully it's better.

I do want to keep some of the "expectation" language as it relates to the change in #1365 which mirrors what we're doing for the build track.

Organizations SHOULD NOT specify technical controls they do not wish consumers

> to form expectations on.

Reviewer: What's the intent of this one? 
I'm thinking "expectations" is just "what claims you should plan to check for in your verifications", but that's sort of different than what might be provided as evidence on an attestation. 
EG, there may be extra claims that apply only to machine-produced code that don't apply to humans. Those claims may or may not exist in an attestation -- they cannot be 100% required to exist on any attestation, but they are an important part of the guarantees offered by the producer, so they should be sort of "expected" in a sense.

Reviewer 2: I tend to agree; I think consumers should form expectations based on what an organization explicitly communicates rather than what the organization may be producing above and beyond. FWIW, a trial of a control (from the example further down) would likely also include checking that the metadata can be embedded and used within the SCS? Not allowing such a scenario may lead to partially untested claims being rolled out when the organization switches on a new control.

Author: Ok, this is good feedback.  I've addressed it by:

1. Actually defining tag prefixes in the VSA that are reserved for users wishing to record claims in the VSA and how they can distinguish between stuff that's just for their own internal use vs stuff they actually want folks to set expectations for.
2. Allowing orgs to distribute additional attestations with supporting evidence if they want.

This comment thread is now homeless since the relevant text is gone.  I'm going to preemptively resolve but _please_ take a look at the updated language. :)

For example, an organization may be conducting a trial of a new control and
they are not yet sure if they will keep it, or it may have implemented a
proprietary control it does not want to publicize. In these cases the
organization would not configure the SCS to embed metadata about this control

> into the attestations.

Reviewer: one of my expectations is that the source provenance will largely be authored by authorities. 
I would not expect the PR product to allow configuration of which claims it emits for example -- it should emit whatever it thinks is relevant about the operation from its own perspective. 
For example, if a control were enabled, but an authorized user bypassed it, it should not be configurable whether or not to emit that evidence in a provenance attestation -- the PR tool's reputation is on the line. 

I do agree that producers will need to ultimately declare that a subset of their enabled technical controls are guaranteed as evidence of SLSA level. Other control information may be included as optional fun facts.

<td><td><td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="change-management-process"><td>Enforced change management process<td>

> The SCS MUST ensure organization defined technical controls are enforced for
> changes made to protected branches.  It MUST also embed relevant metadata about
> these controls in the [source summary](#summary-attestation) and/or
> [source provenance](#provenance-attestations) attestations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SCS MUST ensure organization-defined technical controls are enforced for
changes made to protected branches.  It MUST also embed relevant metadata about
these controls in the [source summary](#summary-attestation) and/or
[source provenance](#provenance-attestations) attestations
```

or if the revision was not the result of an accepted change management process.

<td><td><td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="enforced-change-management-process"><td>Enforced change management process<td>

The SCS MUST

-   Ensure organization-defined technical controls are enforced for changes made
   to protected branches.
-   Allow organizations to specify
   [additional tags](#additional-tags) to be included in the
   [source summary](#summary-attestation) when the corresponding controls are
enforced.
-   Allow organizations to distribute additional attestations related to their
   technical controls to consumers authorized to access the corresponding source
   revision.

The SCS MUST NOT allow organization specified tags to begin with any value other
than `USER_SOURCE_` or `INTERNAL_USER_` unless the SCS endorses the veracity of
any corresponding claims.

> Enforcement of the organization defined technical controls could be accomplished

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enforcement of the organization-defined technical controls could be accomplished
```

<td><td><td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="change-management-process"><td>Enforced change management process<td>

The SCS MUST ensure organization-defined technical controls are enforced for
changes made to protected branches.  It MUST also embed relevant metadata about
these controls in the [source summary](#summary-attestation) and/or

> [source provenance](#provenance-attestations) attestations

Reviewer 2: I think this is just an "and" rather than "and/or" as at these levels the SCS is required to produce both summary and provenance attestations.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I think I misunderstood the "and/or". It's not about embedding the attestation itself but embedding the control in the attestation. In that sense, I wonder if we want the controls that the provenance is used to verify should be included in the provenance itself? Maybe it only belongs in the summary attestation?

Author: Yes agreed.  I've done a lot of rewriting to this section to take this into account.  PTAL?

This thread is now outdated so I'm going to resolve. :)

MAY include additional properties as asserted by the SCS.  The SCS MUST include _only_ the highest SLSA source level met by the revision.
6.  `dependencyLevels` MAY be empty as source revisions are typically terminal nodes in a supply chain.

The SCS MAY issue these attestations based on its understanding of the underlying system (e.g. based on design docs, security reviews, etc...),
but at SLSA Source Level 3 MUST use tamper-proof [provenance attestations](#provenance-attestations) appropriate to their SCS when making the assessment.

#### Additional properties

The SLSA source track MAY create additional properties to include in
`verifiedLevels` which attest to other claims concerning a revision (e.g. if it
was code reviewed).

The SCS MAY embed organization-provided properties within `verifiedLevels`
corresponding to technical controls enforced by the SCS. If such properties are
provided they MUST be prefixed with `ORG_SOURCE_` to distinguish them from other
properties the SCS may wish use.

-   `ORG_SOURCE_` to indicate a property that is meant for consumption by
   external consumers.

> -   `ORG_SOURCE_INTERNAL_` to indicate a property that is not meant for

Reviewer: It might be implied here that this distinction is only used in VSAs. The source prov would probably just write lists of data -- it doesn't necessarily know which are important.

Reviewer: one interesting case to consider might be the same commit reached from two protected branches, both with different required rules.

Author: > It might be implied here that this distinction is only used in VSAs. The source prov would probably just write lists of data -- it doesn't necessarily know which are important.

Yup, this is under the 'Summary attestation' section so it's just VSAs.

> one interesting case to consider might be the same commit reached from two protected branches, both with different required rules.

Can we leave this undefined and up to the SCS itself for now?

4.  `resourceUri` MUST be set to the URI of the repository, preferably using [SPDX Download Location](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/package-information/#77-package-download-location-field).
E.g. `git+https://github.com/foo/hello-world`.
5.  `verifiedLevels` MUST include the SLSA source track level the SCS asserts the revision meets. One of `SLSA_SOURCE_LEVEL_0`, `SLSA_SOURCE_LEVEL_1`, `SLSA_SOURCE_LEVEL_2`, `SLSA_SOURCE_LEVEL_3`.
MAY include additional properties as asserted by the SCS.  The SCS MUST include _only_ the highest SLSA source level met by the revision.
6.  `dependencyLevels` MAY be empty as source revisions are typically terminal nodes in a supply chain.

The SCS MAY issue these attestations based on its understanding of the underlying system (e.g. based on design docs, security reviews, etc...),
but at SLSA Source Level 3 MUST use tamper-proof [provenance attestations](#provenance-attestations) appropriate to their SCS when making the assessment.

#### Additional tags

The SLSA source track MAY create additional tags to include in `verifiedLevels` which attest

> to other properties of a revision (e.g. if it was code reviewed).  All SLSA source tags will start with `SLSA_SOURCE_`.  Consumers MAY assume all SLSA source tags are meant

Reviewer 2: this sentence trails off. Is the idea that any tag that starts with `SLSA_SOURCE_` can be used by the consumers in verifying VSA expectations?

Author: Ah, I can clean that up.  The idea is that all `SLSA_SOURCE_` tags are 'endorsed' by the SCS itself and should be well defined by SLSA.

Author: I actually went ahead and removed this.  We're talking about additional properties here so there's no reason to talk about `SLSA_SOURCE_` stuff.  I've also gone ahead and indicated which prefixes MUST be used.

> The SCS MAY embed user-provided tags within `verifiedLevels` corresponding to

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking suggestion, maybe we can discuss this after this PR is merged.

Do we want to support additional tags? Maybe the consumer can put `USER_SOURCE_` tags in another attestation (e.g., SCAI) that they then work out how to use in conjunction with the VSA? That avoids even accidental cases where `USER_SOURCE_` tags are ascribed to the organization by some party that's several layers removed from the spec for this and doesn't understand the intent.

I have a similar opinion for `INTERNAL_USER_`. I'm guessing this is to prevent consumers relying on a claim the organization doesn't (yet?) want to provide. However, there will still need to be some out of band exchange of expectations between the org and consumer (e.g., for the `SLSA_SOURCE_` tags), so perhaps this is additional complexity we can do without? Does this address any other scenario that I've missed?

Author: Filed https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/issues/1369

technical controls enforced by the SCS if they are prefixed with:

-   `USER_SOURCE_` to indicate a tag that is meant for consumption by external
   consumers.
-   `INTERNAL_USER_` to indicate a tag that is not meant for consumption by
   external consumers.

> The meaning of the tags is left entirely to the organization. Inclusion of user
> provided tags within `verifiedLevels` SHOULD NOT be considered an endorsement of
> the veracity of the organization defined claim by the SCS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The meaning of the tags is left entirely to the organization. Inclusion of user
provided tags within `verifiedLevels` SHOULD NOT be considered an endorsement of
the veracity of the organization defined claim by the SCS.
```

The term "user" here is confusing me. 
Do we mean "producer" in this case? I don't think we mean developer or PR author or something, so it's not the same as "user provided timestamps".

These are claims introduced (probably) by the organization based on controls they've specified. Shouldn't they be just as trustworthy as any other claims based on tamper-resistant evidence?

Author: God catch, yes "org" or "producer" is better than "user" in this case.

Re-trustworthiness:

I'm making a distinction between trust in the SCS and trust in the Organization which can be different (it is for the source-poc).

Author: Updated the language.  Based on other comments I think we're agreed about how trustworthy these are ("take it or leave it").

If not please reopen?
